Hansel minutes.com is Hansel
minutes. Our weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists, Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 75. Recorded
live Thursday, August 30th, 2009. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Tellerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks about stack overflow
with Jeff Edwards. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
I've got Jeff Atwood today.
Hey, how's it going, Jeff?
Good. I'm going great. You've
been doing a lot of
speed improvements on stack overflow.
Is this an ongoing thing
or is this like the
weekend of speed or how
did that, how did that
go down? Well, we I've
always felt that performance is
kind of a feature that
performance in and of itself
is desirable eat on the
web. And there's a lot
of studies that sort of
backs us up. There's one
that Google famously did a
timing. They're running some kind
of experiment on search results
and they didn't control for
speed and they fell these
interesting results where they saw
this big drop off. And
once they controlled for speed
of rendering, they realized that
most of the drop off
was due to like extra
a hundred plus milliseconds of
rendering the page. And I
remember way back, when do
you remember the first time
you used Google? Like the
first time you heard of
Google for some somebody talked
about it for some, you
clicked through. Sure. That's the
thing that struck me about
Google at the time. And
I very distinctly remember this
was that Google was just
incredibly fast. I mean, it
worked too right. It was
very topical. It was a
good search engine, but the
speed was just astonishing compared
to what I was used
to, which I think was
like Alta Vista at the
time. Yeah. Yeah. There should
be a joke that Google
would be coming back as
you're pushing as the, the
button that you just pushed
is coming up. Yeah, it
was, it was almost instantaneous
and, and that's always sort
of stuck with me that,
that lesson and when it
comes to stack overflow, I
think one thing that we
look at is even if
we're not relevant, we want
to be extremely fast. I
mean, speed is, is, as
I said, in and of
itself, a goal on top
of all the other stuff,
I mean, ideally we want
to be relevant. We want
to provide the answer to
your programming question on stack
overflow, hopefully, but if we
can't do that, we're going
to be extremely fast. So
whenever you see a stack
overflow search results, your search
pages, you have sort of
a reassurance that if you
click on it, you're going
to know if it sucks
immediately. Okay. So it's like
content is King speed is
King, right? Which a lot
of sites, I mean, how
many sites do you go
to on the web now
where you click on the
link and then you wait,
you wait and have to
load the ads and it
has to load it just
an excruciating process. Even figure
out if the content is
what you want it or
not. So we're kind of
very vocal and in favor
of this, be fast at
all costs idea. And it's
something that we keep coming
back to over time and
trying to improve our speed
as we go along. It's
a process of continual And
how many of them are,
how many people are you
though? You're not a big
team, right? No, we're not
a big team. It's it's
me and two other developers.
And how much development are
you doing? Oh, so you're
like you have three full
time developers. Yes. Okay. That's
true. Although I'm a little
bit scatterbrained in that, you
know, I have to do,
I have to wear a
number of hats, but I,
I love working on stack
overflow. And I think one
of the things that's fun
for us is that we've
built this site. That's turned
out to be really popular.
And if you think about
your career as a developer,
and I think we might've
talked about this on an
earlier Hanselman, it's, it's very
satisfying to write code that
a lot of people are
touching. So we get excited
about the prospect of waking
up and working on stack
overflow because we know improvements
the stack overflow effect, you
know, hundreds of thousands of
people per day that are
interacting with your software on
the open internet. So it's
satisfying from that perspective as
well too, to have something
that's so popular is very
gratifying. And to know that
every little change you make
to it, that makes it
better. And even in some
really small way, like we
improved the loading of the
page, you know, 10%, well
that's 10% times, you know,
we're almost up to a
million page views per day
now, so that's 10% times
a million. So, and then
it's also amortized across, we
have multiple sites. So we
have stack overflow, which is
for programmers. We have server
fault, which is for system
administrators. We have super user,
which is just for, you
know, computer enthusiasts. And then
we have our meta discussion
site. So already, if we
improve some aspect of the
core engine, that that's times
four and then on one
side it's times million. So
it was interesting. I, I
didn't really predict that happening,
but now every time we
work on the code, it's
like we amortize the benefits
of that times in we're
in is the number of
sites that we have running
engine. How do you, how
do you roll the changes
up? How do you deploy
Right now? Everything is on
cruise control. So we have
cruise control set up to,
you know, get the source
from source control. And we
use subversion at the moment
for source control. Do the
bill run. We have some
fun, very, very rudimentary unit
testing that we do and
then deploy it to the
site live. And we have
two tiers. We have a
development tier and then a
production tier. And then of
course we have the tiers
on our local machine. We
do a lot of local
development. So typically the, the,
the way this works is
we'd come up with some
idea about how can make
things faster. We check in
and locally benchmark it locally,
see if it's actually faster
or not, or whatever metric
we're using, whether it's a
clock time or page size
or something like that. And
then do a build to
development. And that's, you know,
dev dot, whatever. We check
that out on the live
server. And then if we
like it, then we deploy
it. And that's just a
one click operation in cruise
control, deploy to change. And
we deploy on average, at
least one time per day,
we try to do it
at the L the low
traffic times for us, which
ends up being around 10:00 PM.
Pacific standard time. Really? 10:00 PM.
Yep. Yeah. Well, yeah, the
traffic cycle is really interesting
in that. I think we
have a very global audience.
So by about 11:00 PM, Pacific
standard traffic is already up
again. So we have sort
of a limited window where
if we want to do
it, the absolute, you know,
trough lowest point of traffic,
that's usually 10:00 PM. Ish. And
then what if it goes
bad? Oh, then we would
take the site down. We
have the there's that magical
page and asp.net that takes
the site down. I can't
remember App underscore offline. Yes.
Thank you. Offline file. So
we have one of those
for each site. So we
would rename that file, which
you take the site offline
and puts up a nice
little, you know, page saying,
Hey, we're download for a
little bit and you can
go to the blog if
you want information about that,
if it goes on for
awhile and then we fix
it, hopefully, and then fly
it. I mean, that does
happen. It's not super common,
but it does happen. What
about when you make changes
to the database that are
not something you can back
out? We haven't had too
much of a problem with
that. Generally we make database
changes there. I guess it'd
be category of sort of
like adding columns as one
of the changes. It's not
really a breaking change. You
know, you add a new
column, it doesn't necessarily affect
the old code because the
code doesn't really care. If
there's an extra column, it
just ignores it. Not certainly
we have refactored the database.
We had a giant database
refactoring, gosh, about three months
ago, but it's not super,
super common for us to
do that. So that hasn't
come up in practice too
much. So this, this might
be a weird question, but
I think that other people
are thinking about it, which
is you've got three guys.
Your guys are very productive.
It's very fast, it's a
clean, good looking site that
provides a great deal of
functionality. You know, it's a
hell of a lot more
complicated than their dinner. It's
in production. It's dramatically successful.
We're not seeing you seeing
publicly, at least you suffering
with, you know, is the
micro, why are you guys
so successful on the Microsoft
stack? You're doing a great
job. Is this just because
you're really smart? I mean,
do you have the same
kind of like pounding your
head against the wall problems
that everyone has when programming,
when get nailed, you get
stuck and you spend three
days trying to figure something
out, and then you discover
that it was something obvious
and it was poor documentation
on our part or whatever.
Well, I think there's, there's
an initial hump. You have
to get over both in
terms of building something that
people want to use and
are interested in and solves
an actual problem for them.
And then the development problem
of just structuring it in
a way that makes sense
behind the scenes. So I
think we got over those
humps really early on in
the process in terms of
having a beta and sort
of throwing it out there
and seeing if people were
responding to it. And clearly
they were even in the
beta, we could see what
we had, something that people
liked and enjoyed using. And
then from a code perspective,
I think our philosophy has
been to keep it as
simple as possible. You know,
the classic kiss philosophy is
like, let's, don't have a
lot of dependencies. We picked
asp.net NBC because we wanted
this, this model of really
tight control over what's rendered
to the page with a
minimum of complexity in terms
of layers, getting in the
way of what we're doing.
And a lot of our
design choices, our architecture choices
reflect this philosophy like for
our object relational layer, we
use linked to SQL, which
is extremely lightweight. I mean,
that's essentially letting the database
be your model for the
most part. It's a very,
very thin layer in front
of you in the database,
but it works really well
for us. You know, it's
very lightweight. It gets the
job done. We're not using
hibernate or, you know, entity
framework or anything like that.
That's really sort of heavyweight.
And I think that philosophy
of picking the lightest thing
that can work has served
as well in development. Now
it does mean that sometimes
we end up writing our
own code to solve problems
rather than adopting some sort
of common off the shelf
thing. And sometimes we get
criticized for that. But I
think in terms of solving
the problem for our specific
niche, you know, the audience
that we're trying to serve,
I think you end up
doing a little bit better
if you, if you write
it yourself, if you know
exactly what your audience, you
think at least, you know
exactly what your audience needs
and you build just that.
I think you can do
a little bit better in
the longterm than picking a
lot of off the shelf
components and sort of duct
taping them together. That said,
we give some dependencies. Now
let me actually list some
of our dependencies. Cause we
have a few, one is
a recapture. So we use
an off the shelf recapture
control for spam prevention and,
you know, blocking bots and
things like that. So we
didn't write that. That's just
a component we picked up
and plugged into our code
base. Another thing is.net open
ID. And I think it's
called.net authorization or something like
that. Cause it also does
a lot. Yeah, well.it. Open
off it's Andrew Arnott's project.
Yes. That we picked up
and continued to use. So
we will pick up third
party components, but only when
we feel like, you know,
we have a very, very
strong need and a demonstrated
case for doing that. I
was just talking to another
developer who was kind of
complaining that he was looking
at some project where it
was 10 open source things
right off the bat that
were all dependencies, which, which
isn't necessarily a problem. But
you know, when you're, when
you're duct taping 10 things
together, it can get a
little bit awkward in terms
of the number of dependencies
you have. So we view
dependencies as kind of a
negative, like we only take
them really, really need them,
even something like logging, which
a lot of people view
as very fundamental and it
is fundamental, but we had
problems early on with log
for net and we weren't
just ultimately didn't need that
much logging. So I decided
to drop log for net,
which would be sacrilege to
some developers. Hmm. But do
you, have you gotten in
trouble, have you painted yourself
into a corner? You're talking
about the architectural decisions, the
third party decisions. Like one
of the things that I
was thinking is that, you
know, you might go and
start designing your site and
then you find that you've,
you didn't think out your,
your navigational strategy so that
you end up when you
hit the back button on
the browser, you get that,
I need to repost this
because you know, the page
has expired type stuff. So
you didn't use like post
redirect get as your, as
your model. Have you gotten
yourself into those kind of
situations or did you already
know that and, and, and
think it out ahead of
time? Well, I think with
any project, there's, it's hard
to always make the right
decisions. So I think what
you want to do is
you want to optimize for
being like, wait again, which
comes back to my, the
central point I was making
earlier, which is that being
lightweight and being simple ends
up being the biggest positive
on the project. And so
sure, absolutely. We've made tons
of wrong decisions. Tons of
things that didn't make sense
in retrospect then No, but
not like, not like in
retrospect, but I'm talking about
like, and now suddenly the
site was that not functional
in some way, or you
got stuck or you thought
this was a good idea,
but you got it. It
crippled one that you fixed
something, but it crippled one
other aspect of the site.
Well, I guess the way
to measure that is one
thing I do look at
is, is how many, how
many times do we have
to fix the same code?
You know, are there any
problem areas in your code
where like, you, you, you
keep deploying fixes over and
over to the same area
and you know, it's like
a trouble spot in your
code. Basically. It's like a
bad neighborhood and your code
every time you drive by,
you know, something bad happens
to you. And certainly that's
symptomatic of, of a design
issue. And we have had
a few areas like that.
Like one area that we,
we definitely had a problem
with early on was with
validation. And as you know,
well, anyone who's worked with
asp.net MVC knows validation was
kind of one of the
weak areas of the toolkit
early on. There wasn't a
lot of stuff there, you
know, that was prebuilt yet
kind of roll your own.
And we initially had really
aggressive client side validation in
JavaScript and jQuery and things
like that. And it seemed
like a good idea, but,
but the problem with it
was that we'd relied so
heavily on client validation that
we kind of forgotten about
server-side validation as sort of
the backbone of what you're
doing. Cause I mean, you
have to have both, you
can't have one or the
other because you know, the
client could send you anything.
Ultimately if they turn off
JavaScript or whatever, they don't
have any validation. So we
ended up having to backfill
tons of validation on the
server that we probably should
have had there from day
one. So it was kind
of a, it was an
out of order issue and
it caused all kinds of
problems later for us in
the code where we hadn't
really thought through server side
validation to the degree that
we really should have from
day one. And we didn't
see it because our quiet
time validation was so good
that we just kind of
forgot. And that was definitely
painful. That was definitely an
architectural mistake, but I view
it as more of just
an out of order issue,
but it certainly led to
the phenomenon I'm describing where
every time we touched it,
something would break or there
was this new case, like
international characters weren't raking, right.
And actually a good example
of this. And I actually
sent you an email on
this guy. You may remember
is a client side. Validation
of international characters is incredibly
annoying because the JavaScript doesn't
do a good job of
dealing with you. Don't have
this fancy Unicode support and
JavaScript on the client that
you do on the server.
So, you know, I had
people who I deeply respect
to this programmers who happen
to have international characters in
their names, emailing me saying,
I can't post on your
site because it says my
name is invalid. And it
was totally a client side
validation issue. It had nothing
to do with our server
validation and it made us
look really bad. So we
kind of ripped out a
lot of that. And the
other downside was that it
was a big dependency on
the quiet. It was like
10 kilobytes of JavaScript, which
doesn't sound like much, but
it was like this, this
huge framework for doing all
this kind of validation on
the client. And we were
using a tiny fraction of
it, you know, and the
fraction we were using, wasn't
working that great anyway. So
ultimately we decided to go
in and rip it out
based on a variety of
different, you know? Yep. I
had the, I had the
exact same problem. On the
other side I was working
on where suddenly people named
Jose couldn't log in, if
they really liked to have
the accent over their name.
Yeah. It was shocking how
weird client side validation got
to be and how heavy
it was because we had
to serve it up on
every single page, every body
who visits the site because
we allow anonymous participation. So
any random user hitting us
from Google had to have
their client site input validated,
which meant they had to
pull down this 10 kilobyte
dependency. So to P to
performance, have you put things
like that on like content
delivery networks yet? Have you
started to spread out your
static dependencies like that? Well,
you know, it's God, you
know what, the thing that's
been amazing to me is
how fractal the performance problem
is. I mean, we've spent
a year over year net
in this code base. So
not that we know what
we're doing, cause we don't
necessarily always know what we're
doing, but we know this
code backwards and forwards, right?
I mean, that's the challenge
is we've gotten to the
point now where we're sharing
code with the developers at
fog Creek because they're working
on this thing called stack
exchange, which is a hosted
for pay version of stack
overflow, where you could say,
Hey, stack overflow is awesome.
I want to do a
stack overflow for librarians, you
know, so you would then
call it, plug Greek and
send them your credit card.
And you would start, you
know, library exchange, you know,
that could change the stack
overflow for librarians. So we
have developers from fog Creek
looking at our code, and
this was significant for us
because this is really the
first people that from the
outside, if you will, that
have had the chance to
actually look at our code.
And you forget when you've
been in a code base
for a year, you forget
how intuitive stuff is to
you because you've been working
on it for a year.
And people from the outside
are like, what, what, what
is this right there? What
is this alien planet I've
landed on with no atmosphere
and you know, where all
the trees are shaped funny
and you know, luckily we
haven't gotten any seriously negative
feedback. I don't think fog
Creek is trying to be
nice to us. I think
they would tell us the
truth if they thought our
code sucked. But at the
same time, you know, it's
really a challenge to get
into an alien code base
and figure out how it
works and troubleshoot performance and
things like that. It takes
a long time to get
up to speed. So even
with us being totally up
to speed, this performance problem
is so fractal. Like every
month we come up with
new ways to make things
faster that we hadn't even
thought of before. And we're
intimately familiar with the code.
It's almost like, you know,
they always used to joke
that, you know, particularly with
Oracle, which is well known
for being incredibly difficult to
optimize and having all these
special like priests that magically
make things go faster. But
even in a very sane
system, the, the, the upside
for performances, it's just shocking.
It's almost like you could
double triple, quadruple performance if
you really rolled up your
sleeves and, and got down
to it. So we, we
like to continually revisit this
every few months and it's
got, I don't know how
you do it, but one
way we do it is
that tool Y slow from,
from Yahoo and also Google
page speed, which is intimately
related. So you can run
these reports. They're all based
on Firebug they'll layer on
top of Firebug that sort
of gives you a bunch
of information about your, your
webpage, how it's loading, where
it's loading, things like that.
And I'll give you a
bunch of recommendations about how
to speed things up, how
to, how to arrange your,
your dependencies so that the
page actually comes down faster
or appears to come down
faster. Hey everybody, this is
Scott coming at you from
another place in time. No
doubt. You probably bumped into
testing tasks now, and then,
and your work and, you
know, writing functional tests is
probably not your favorite thing.
It's kind of difficult. It
takes time and the results
can be dubious. Well, get
ready to start liking tests.
Thanks to Tellerik with the,
the new web testing framework.
Building web automation test is
a breeze. You've got code
automation with advanced asp.net, Ajax
and server wide applications. You
can write a single test,
have it executed against multiple
browsers at once. You'd benefit
from a rich API there's
link support integration with visual
studio, unit testing, also end
unit X unit and MBA
unit, not to mention the
free rappers for Telerik rad
controls for ESPN and Ajax,
and several light, all shipping
with Telerik's new testing tool.
One of the best features,
the webinar testing framework, which
is developed by art of
test is it's absolutely free
Friday got hooked on web
testing framework, start using it
right away, go to tellerik.com
for more info. Thanks a
lot. So you've just recently
done a bunch of performance
improvements. You've upped things like
the Jesus compression level, you
minified, JavaScript and CSS. And
there was an interesting thread
on, on stack overflow where
you were talking about, you
were explaining the different kinds
of magnification, like someone was
saying, well, is this packed?
Well, it's not really packed.
That's different than identification. Can
you talk a little bit
about the different ways you
can squish text? Well, you
know, one thing that's interesting
is a lot of stuff
we're doing is related to
the bill. We do a
lot of magic in the
build process, which our build
process over time has gotten
pretty hairy because in addition
to the normal, like having,
you know, a development here
in a production tier and
all that stuff, the build
script has to be cognizant
of, of, of a number
of things. One is the
minification process. So we actually
shell out to Java to
run the Yahoo magnification program.
I can't remember the name
of that off the top
of my head, but if
you look up Yahoo and
minify, so what this does,
and when I say minify,
what I mean is you
take your JavaScript and CSS
and you remove all the
white space from it. You
rename well, in the case
of JavaScript, you rename all
the variables like ABC D
you know, something really short,
right? And you just compact
it down to the smallest
possible space. So it becomes
sort of unreadable. It's almost
like obfuscating, not really, but
it ends up being defacto
obfuscation of your JavaScript. Now
that's not really the goal
for us. The goal is
just to, cause we have
a fairly heavy JavaScript payload
on the site, and we
want to make that load
as rapidly as possible. So
the build script will shell
out to this Java program,
which takes the JavaScript, which
is it down, takes the
CSS, which is it down
and then rewrites it on
the disc to the development
and production tier. So from
our development machines perspective, the,
the files are full size,
but when they get rolled
out to the development or
production tier, they're actually much,
much smaller. Now the civic
question that, that you're referring
to was that there's this
crazy thing called packer, which
actually implements compression in JavaScript,
which is weird. So somebody
has literally written like a
zip algorithm, a zip like
algorithm in JavaScript that would
actually take a JavaScript file
and unzip it in memory,
which is very, very clever,
but like just, there's so
many things that can go
wrong with this, right? I
mean, and plus you're paying
the penalty of JavaScript having
to be your unzip engine.
So that's a really severe
cost. It's almost never worth
it. So that packer ends
up being sort of one
of those things. That's, that's
clever from a programming perspective,
but just not very, very
practical, but the minification is
when, when totally. And you'll
notice that sites like Google
and Yahoo and all the
big sites do this, even
a file, all their stuff
they send down. It's just,
it's very logical to do
that. This is it. This
is the part I never
quite understood is that I
remember people were telling me
10, well, gosh, how many
years ago, 20 years ago
to when I was doing
my antsy art to kind
of optimize my, my text
files and other people were
saying, no, no, no. You
know, the 9,600 baud modems
got hardware compression built in.
It's not that big of
a deal. You know, you're
gonna spend all this time
moving things around. So you're
saying that even now on
a quad core machine with
a 20 megabit connection, if
I take, you know, VAR
foo and make it VAR
F enough times, it will
actually have a perceptible difference
to my experience on the
web. Well, if you have
hundreds of variables, I mean,
this is a numbers game.
No, I get that. But
I'm surprised that it takes
hundreds. Like why, why not
millions? Well, I, I think
it's, you have to go
back to, it's a numbers
game, you know, and there's
a lot of sites on
the internet. And our goal
is to be, you know,
we have to be competitive,
right? We have to provide
a better experience than other
sites. And one of the
ways we decided we want
to do this is by
being extremely fast or as
fast as we can make
it. And so we're already
gonna have a leg up
over sites that don't do
this. So sites that don't
use compression or don't minify
are going to look bad
compared to stack overflow. We
want to look really, really
good. So it's a competitive
advantage to do it. And
plus from a geek perspective,
what you're really doing is
you're optimizing for the expensive
resource, which is bandwidth. Even
if you have, you know,
a quad core blazing machine,
very few people have, you
know, the world's fastest connection
to the internet. Most people
have cable modem or DSL
or something like that. So
the precious resource is really
the bandwidth and you have
tons of CPU. So why
not optimize for CPU, which
is exactly what compression is
about. It's about making the
thing that sent over the
wire really small, and then
spending a little bit of
CPU time, not a lot,
cause there is a trade
off there, like with the
packer dot JS that I
talked about and make it
bigger on the other side.
So that was also the
reason we tweaked Jesus and
sort of turned up the
fundamental Jesus levels. And that's
kind of an important optimization
actually, there's this fantastic article
that I found that where
somebody had gone through and
documented in exhaustive detail, all
the different levels of Jesus
and where the tradeoff was
because I asked it defaults
these really non-aggressive minimalistic compression
levels and you can immediately
do 10% better at almost
no cost just by tweaking
these numbers. So it's kind
of a fun tweak to
make, just cause out of
the box, you're not really
optimal and it's very easy
to become optimal by turning
up the GC of compression
to level four. Why is
it though that this isn't
built in? I mean, it's
just the kind of thing
you'd like to see Microsoft
or visual studio built in.
I mean, you've got a
whole kind of litany of
this is optimal. This something
like, for example, the jesus'
compression level, you said like
clearly the sweet spot is
for, you have said, if
it's the sweet spot of
spore, why, why is it
that, that the default is
almost always the opposite of
the sweet spot? Well, I
think what happens is, you
know, a company like Microsoft
is, is building products for
a huge audience and everybody's
doing different things. You know,
there's no one thing that
everybody's doing. So you have
to build in settings that
are optimal for everyone. And
that means sort of watering
it down to some degree.
And we actually ran into
this. I think you may
remember with SQL server where
we had a huge problem
with locking in SQL server
because out of the box
SQL server defaults to this
fairly aggressive walking level, you
know, that leads to a
lot of contention in the
database because you end up
with all these read locks
and I was like read
blocks. So I was like,
why are you locking data
that I'm just reading? I
don't even care. You know,
don't lock that data. So
we had an out of
the box immediately switch SQL
server to a much less
aggressive locking level and all
our contention problems went away.
But I understand why Microsoft
chips it that way because
you know, you might be
a bank or you might
have these integrity issues or,
you know what performance, you
may not have the performance
problems that we have, you
know, because we're becoming this
fairly major website with a
lot of traffic. So why
not trade performance for reliability?
Right? That'd be the example.
And the compression example, one
thing that happens with compression
is you fall off a
cliff with size. Like if
you're serving up 800 kilobyte
documents, which, okay, that's weird,
right? But people might do
it. They might serve up
800 kilobytes worth of dynamic
data per page. And if
you have compression level four
on that's starting to get
really painful, even at compression
level four. So, but a
compression level one, which is
Microsoft ships with a, that
will be less painful. The
drop off is less severe.
So they're optimizing for the
every case. Okay. What, what's
an average page size. Like
what's a, what's an edge
actually. What's an edge case,
interestingly, on stack overflow. Cause
you get some really popular
questions every once in a
while, you'll have a question
where someone asks something off
topic and those are always
the most interesting questions. And
then you've got, you know,
hundreds of comments and stuff.
What's the maximum size of
page can be on stack
overflow. Well, we, we kept
the number of questions or
answers per page at 30.
And that was a change
we made really early on
because we didn't predict these
long discussion type questions would
occur. That's just, you know,
people having fun chiming in,
and there's nothing wrong with
having fun as long as
it's relatively on topic. But
we, we that's a de
facto cap on the size
of the page when only
30 answers can appear at
any given time. So I
would say our largest pages
are probably like, I dunno,
a hundred kilobytes at most,
and that that's not problematic
for compression. Cause that article
I referred to did a
really good job of benchmarking.
Like what happens when you
have a one kilobyte page,
a 28 kilobyte page, a
hundred kilobyte page, you know,
200, 400, 800. And once
you get to the 400,
800 level, that's when the
bad things start happening with
compression where you would maybe
even want to turn compression
off, which it sounds crazy
to me, but if you're
dynamically compressing 800 kilobytes or
400 kilobytes of data on
every single page requests, it
starts to be a serious
problem. I mean, everybody has
different issues. That's why when
you look at performance, it's
all about, you know, profiling,
looking at the data and
understanding exactly what your site
is doing and how it's
doing it and optimizing for
those specific conditions, right? Like
we've written our code a
certain way and, and you
know, we may have performance
problems that other people don't
have. So it's hard to
make blanket recommendations. Although those
tools why flow and Google
page speed are mostly on
target for most sites. But
even then it'll give you
recommendations that are insane. Like
if you run a small
blog, like Y flow will
tell you, Oh, you need
to use a content distribution
network. Right. Which is ridiculous.
Why not? Let's see that's
that was my question earlier.
I didn't get answered was
like, why is a CDN
ridiculous It's well, Hey, it's
massive overkill nuclear. It's like
the nuclear option. I mean,
content distribution network means you're
taking some piece of content
like your JavaScript. And you're
saying, I want to distribute
this worldwide to everybody as
fast as possible. So you
would contract with some company
that servers on every continent
on the planet. Right. And
they're going to serve up
your JavaScript as fast as
possible for somebody in Zimbabwe.
Yes, please. Right, Exactly. That's
right. Why was that a
bad thing? It'll work, but
it's very expensive, very expensive
financially, financially. And also like
how many users do you
really have in Zimbabwe? I
mean, like you're solving a
problem. Hang on a second.
This isn't about Zimbabwe. I've
got a lot of people
who listen to my podcast
in Europe and I've got
a German guy who's getting
30 K a second because
he's having to bring a
podcasts over from God. I
don't know where our servers
are in Boston or something
like that. It makes sense
to have my content be
on another continent. That way
it doesn't have to go
across a tiny pipe underneath
the ocean. Right? No, actually
that I agree with. And
on a recent podcast, I
kind of lamented the fact
that we have this really
worldwide audience and it's very
hard to, but I think
you wouldn't, in that case,
you wouldn't want, that's really
a giant, worldwide concentrated distribution
network. You would really want
just a mini distribution network
of just two servers, one
in the U S and
one in Europe. I mean,
you really want to optimize
again for your, you know,
and, and I know where
my audience is coming from
on a stack overflow. And
certainly having one in Europe
would be huge because it's
a big, big percentage of
our audience. So yeah, that's
something I would like to
do. That's sort of the
next step, but I, it's
going to be tough to
get there because then you
start to have data replication
problems where get multiple server
farms and Well, but see,
we're talking, I'm talking about
static content. Yeah. And in
case of static content, it
becomes very easy. And a
and a site at our
scale is starting to get
to the point where we've
maybe should be paying somebody
to do, you know, static
content distribution, these things that
would be crazy for a
small blog, even a very
popular blog, like your blog
or my blog still doesn't
make any sense. Start to
make sense for us. It's
so commoditized. Now we have,
it's not, I kind of
pushed back a little bit
because you were saying, I
felt you were using words
like, you know, big, giant,
complicated worldwide. It's really not
that big of a deal.
I mean, the Ruby on
rails guys, even on tiny
sites will push the CDN
button quickly. And there's a
whole series of plugins where
you just say, I'm going
to use this CDN and
they'll push a button and
then suddenly all the images
will show up elsewhere. And
then why slow will tell
you, that's great because you
have fewer DNS lookups, Right?
Well, there's an aspect of,
you're not going to need
it. I mean, I think
you need to get to
a certain, I think you
need to get to a
certain scale before it makes
sense at all. It's just
complexity. You know, this, this
goes back to keeping it
simple, right? And the simple
thing is to have one
server where everything lives. Yeah.
But you're using this now
though, you're doing this. Now
you have ajax.google APIs where
your J query comes up.
You have S static where
you're bringing the JavaScript in
from. Right. Well, I guess
my fear is that people,
programmers being programmers will hear,
Oh wow, you have all
these, you know, you're using,
you know, content distribution networks
and your problems are my
problems. Like I should do
what you're doing. And I
feel like they're going to
do things that aren't going
to help them. Ultimately, you
know what I mean? I
think you have to scale
the advice to your particular
set of problems. If you
feel like, Hey, stack Overflow's
problems are my problems. I
have the same problems then
sure do that. But bear
in mind that, you know,
there's no real one size
fits all for this advice.
I mean, you have to
look at your specific site,
your six scenario, otherwise you
end up sort of optimizing
for things to kind of
make your life a little
bit more difficult. So that's
what I'm saying is, you
know, use your judgment and
make sure that the things
that apply to stack overflow
apply to you. Yeah. That's
awesome. Well, so I have
one, one question tip idea
about performance on your site.
I noticed that you guys
use Gravatar is everyone uses
Gravatar. They're great. It's that
free service that we always
count on. It just is
magical. And one day it
goes down and then suddenly
my site will hang halfway
through rendering because we're trying
to go get the picture
of some someone's email address.
Most blog engines have instituted
some fairly straightforward handlers where
they do Gravatar caching. Have
you thought about doing that?
You Know, there was a
period where Gravatar was, had
a really bad, bad, bad
performance profile. I remember this,
this was like two years
ago, three years. Yeah. There
were some really bad times.
There were months there where
I just shut it off
For bad now to their
credit. I have not, since
we launched that overflow, I
have yet to see I've
seen every now and then
I've seen, Gravatar slow down
a little bit, but I
haven't seen any kind of
problems like the battle days.
And I I'm a little,
although what you're describing, which
is basically go out and
get the stuff from Gavin,
Gravatar cash it locally and
serve it up is a
nice idea. I haven't really
seen it become a problem
for us yet. And it
definitely would be additional complexity.
So I'm, I'm kind of
loath to do it. Although,
like you said, Gravatar is
kind of magical, you know,
it's, it's just thing we
just assume is always going
to be out there. And
then on the other hand,
like I don't think our
current rendering strategy blocks on
Gravatar image source equals, which
the browser does an outstanding
job of saying, Hey, I
can't load this image, whatever.
Right. It's going to show
up, but the browser has
X number of threads, a
what is it now? 10
on newer browsers and two
on simpler ones. And basically
if something's on a different
domain than that, you'll go
get another thread and fire
that off. So I guess
that would mean all Gravatar
is, would block on one
thread. But my, my, I
think what I'm thinking is
that if the Gravatar stuff
was down, that thread not
being used to, to other
stuff, it could be using,
it could be doing so
you're right. Well, if you
had it locally and you
have, I'm going to guess
that you you're big into
statistics and you do a
lot of stats to figure
out who who's, what's your
relationship between new people versus
folks that show up to
stack overflow all the time.
You probably have a nice
big meaty part of the
bell curve where it's the
same several thousand guys that
show up why keep telling
Gravatar to serve those graphics
as the same several thousand
guys wander around and know
that it's an extra piece
of complexity, but the idea
of get this, put it
on disc and check here
first and give it an
expiration is a pretty understood
thing. It'd be interesting at
least to do the, to
do the math, to find
out if you're coming back
in X number of milliseconds,
Gravatar could be the slowest
thing on your, in your
rendering. Right? And I think
you've brought up a couple
of really interesting points, which
is one is that the
performance profiling of a browser
has become an art. I
mean, there's all these crazy
little rules that the browser
uses to determine when it's
going to render things, how
it's going to render things.
This is why you're told
we'll put the CSS like
the very first line, the
earliest possible line should be
the CSS import, you know,
bringing in that CSS file
because that blocks like tons
of stuff. And then you're
supposed to also put all
your scripts at the very
bottom of the file for
similar reasons. And then of
course this varies somewhat per
browser, different browsers do things
slightly differently. Then just the
way you lay out the
page with the dibs, the
complexity of your CSS, you
know, the way you're referring
to the hierarchy of CSS
can become a performance problem.
It's almost like, like performance
profiling. The browser has become
an art in and of
itself. And this is what's
so great about tools like
Y flow and Google page
speed is they've started to
codify these browser performance rules
in a way that people
can understand and actually start
to build faster sites because
the browser is kind of
an awkward platform, right? I
mean, it's great. It works
great. I mean, apps in
the browser, believe me, I'm
not complaining because we're basically
one of these apps in
the browser, but it's not
exactly the world's most optimal
platform as you're pointing out.
Like the thing with Gravatar,
there's all this room for
optimization. And this is where
optimization becomes that fractal problem
of like, you can just
continually go back to the
well and come up with
ways to make things faster.
And these clever hacks, I
mean, I know in 1999,
I never imagined that Google
maps would be faster than
running a mapping application locally
on my PC that continues
to blow my mind that
I can go to Google
maps and have a faster
startup experience, a faster mapping
experience than like Microsoft streets
and trips, which is a
local app on my hard
drive. It was a great
application, but it's completely obsolete.
Totally. Because when I go
to Google maps, it loads
almost instantly. And like everywhere,
zoom, everything, it doesn't make
any sense at all. The
whole thing, just still, like
I said, blows my mind.
It's just a big VT,
100 terminal emulator, right? Yeah.
That you can have a
mapping app in the browser
running that fast. That's crazy.
Right. I would, if you
had told me that in
1999, I would literally probably
laughed you out of the
room. You're ridiculous. You're a
bozo get out of the
room, but that's the world
we live in. And so
the speed to get to
the specific case that you
outlined. Yes. You could totally
do that. I mean, you
could intermediates yourself between your
website and Gravatar and do
all this clever catching and
stuff. And it would definitely
work. My concern is that
I would like to see
the Gravatar service get better.
Like I, they already do
a very, very good job.
I mean, we think continual
improvement. We haven't seen these
performance problems that we saw
early on, but on the
other side, it behooves you
as a site owner to
test your site as if
your dependencies are down, because
what happens, right? Like what
happens in stack overflow if
Google is down? Well, right
now you're pretty host because
that jQuery dependency is a
really important one. But even
then if jQuery was down,
Google was down. If they
say you could still post
questions, you could still answer
questions. You just wouldn't get
the fancy editor experience. You
wouldn't be able to vote
because that requires JavaScript. So
you need to think about
if your dependencies are unavailable,
what happens now in the
case of Gravatar, it really
doesn't matter that much because
the images are not really
blocking anything of significance. And
if they weren't there, the
experience wouldn't be affected that
profoundly. But in the case
of jQuery, it would be
a fairly effect. And the
problem we have in recovering
from failure to load jQuery
is really kind of a
hard problem because you can't
rely on a lot of
the startup events in jQuery
that use all over the
place, like ready, the ready
event, which is like core
use all the time stops
being available, which means you
have to basically rearchitect your
code to not rely on.
You have to, you know,
insert another layer, kinda like
what you're talking about. The
Gravatar is like, you have
another layer of this onion.
You're peeling back all these
layers to, to figure out
how your dependencies fit in
and how you deal with
them not being available. But
it's a fun problem. I
mean, and that's what we
love so much about stack
overflow is again, we get
such traffic. So it's, it's,
you're working on something that
touches a lot of people
in some way. And then
it's such a fascinating performance
problem. I mean, every day
we're able to come at
it and figure out new
things and not just, okay,
so that's the web, that's
the browser part of the
porous equation, which is huge,
huge. Then on top of
that, we have the server
side performance problem, right? And
that is essentially for us
all about optimizing SQL queries,
which is a totally different
art, right. Entirely, but it's
a fun one. Like it's
fun to bust out the,
the SQL server profiler and
look at all the queries
you're doing and actually figure
out why they're slow, why
they're fast, what you're doing
wrong, what indexes you need,
how should you structure your
tables? This is a problem
that, again, it's very fractal
in nature. We're even now
just last night we deployed
two or three major fixes.
One was they fixed the
optimizations to the way we're
querying for stuff. And some
of the queries that you
come up with are just,
non-intuitive like, you would not
believe that query a would
be faster than query B.
Like they don't, if you
look at them on the
page, it doesn't make sense
why one is faster than
the other. So it's all
very subtle. It has to
do with how the data
is stored, how SQL servers
processing query so on and
so forth. But it's all
about profiling. Like we use
ants profiler, which is a
great, great tool, and we
run our code through it
and it sort of shows
us the hotspots. The hotspots
are nine times out of
10 queries. You know, there
are places in the code
where you're hitting the database.
That's almost always the slow
stuff in your code. Although
occasionally we screw up and
we'll have our own code
be slow, which means it's
really bad to be slower
than the database. You have
to be pretty bad, but
it does happen. But most
of the time it's these
queries. And then it's just
a matter of figuring out,
Hey, do we have to
do this query? Like, why
is this query out there?
Like, do we need this
data at this point in
time and be like, how
can we make this query
go faster? Can we query
less columns? Can we scope
it tighter to only specific
subclasses of users, all that
stuff, because we want to
optimize for the anonymous user
experience as much as possible
because that's 90% of our
traffic is people that have
no account on stack overflow
hitting us, you know, maybe
for the first time ever.
So optimizing for that anonymous
user case ends up being
one of the more important
things that you'll do. And
you have these users that
love your site that are
very adamant that they need
these certain features. They need
things to be a certain
way, but they're only, you
know, 10% of your audience
in terms of percentages right
now, they may be generating
tons of the content. So
that's another reason that they're
important, obviously, but in terms
of the, the random user
experience on your site, making
things better for your logged
in users is a very
small part of the equation.
So, you know, this all
feeds into the problem. And
like I said, it's a,
it's a fun one to
have. It's just, it's fascinating
problem to work on performance.
Cool. Well, it sounds like
you guys are having a
hell of a lot of
fun. I appreciate you sitting
down with me today and
giving us a little bit
of insight into what, what
a three programmers can do.
It's pretty amazing. It's fantastic.
I mean, I, I feel
like we were very fortunate
to be in the position
that we're in and we
w we really believe very
seriously and sort of serving
our audience and then making
the site, you know, a
resource that we would want
to use as well as
everybody else. It's nice to
be in the audience as
well as be one of
the developers. Cool. Well, thanks
so much, Jeff Atwood for
talking to me about stack
overflow and some of the
performance optimizations that you have
been doing. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and we'll see you again
next week.